### The Vedic Age (1500-500 BCE)

- Harappan culture was followed by another great civilisation and culture known as Vedic culture
- called Vedic Age as its reconstruction is primarily based on using Vedic texts as sources
- Indo-Aryans - believed to be the composers of Vedic texts
- term ‘Indo-Aryans’ is basically a linguistic term and refers to speakers of a sub group of the Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family of language
- Rig Veda composers describe themselves as Arya (ar-to cultivate) (in sanskrit means new comer)

#### Different theories abount the home of Aryans

Theory | Postulates | Supported by
----|----|----
European Theory | Continent of Europe is the home land of Aryans. On the basis of comparative linguistics of Greek, Latin, German, Gothic, Celtic, and Sanskrit (Indo-European family of languages), we find certain structural similarities and cognates (similar related words); The Indo-Aryans came to India from Eurasia, they were semi-nomadic people and came from the plains of Eastern Europe, especially the area north of Black Sea | Sir William Jones (1786); Giles (Hungary); Shroeder (France); P. Nehring (Steppes (S. Russia)); Morgan (Western Siberia)
Central Asian Theory | Central Asia is the homeland of the Aryans. With the comparative study of the ‘Avesta’ (Iranian text) and the ‘Vedas’, one finds striking linguistic relationship between them of not just words but of concepts too | Max Muller (Central Asia); E-Meyer Herzfeld
Artic Region Theory | Homeland is the Northern Arctic region, as the Vedas speak about 6 months each of long days and long nights, which happens only in the Arctic region | Dr. Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Tibet Theory | Tibet is the original home of Aryans with reference to the Vedas and other Aryan texts | Swami Dayanand Saraswati
Indian Theory | Indigenous to the subcontinent. There are definite literary evidences in the Vedas that the Aryans regarded the Sapta Sindhu as their original home. Sanskrit, more than any other European language, contains the largest number of original Indo-European vocables. It had greater contact with the parent language of the Aryans than any other European languages. The sacrificial rituals of the Vedic Aryans point to their Indian origin. The geographical data found in the Rig Veda fit in with the geography of Punjab and the neighbouring regions. The river hymns in the Rig Veda mention the names of the rivers of the region. The flora and fauna mentioned is mostly similar to the Himalayan region | Dr. Sampurnanand and A.C. Das (Sapta Sindhu); Ganganath Jha (Brahmarishi); Desa (situated in the confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna); L.D. Kala (Kashmir); R.B. Pandey (Madhya Pradesh)

- mostly accepted view is that instead of an Aryan invasion, there was a series of Indo-Aryan Immigrations
- (The archaeological evidence of the immigration comes from what is known as Andronovo Culture situated in Southern Siberia. From here people moved to the north of Hindukush (the area known as Bactria-Margiana Archaeological complex) and from here they entered India)
- earliest Aryans lived in the land of the ==Sapta Sindhu== (Sindhu is the river par excellence of the Aryans)
- The region was drained by the seven rivers, viz., ==the Indus (Sindhu), and its five tributaries, namely, the Jhelum (Vatista), Beas (Vipasa), Chenab (Askini), Ravi (Purushni), Sutlej (Sutudri), and the Saraswati (modern Ghaggar Hakra)==